The essays assembled in this volume are all, in one way or another, about this disparity.
We no longer like to think about bureaucracy, yet it informs every aspect of our existence.
It’s as if, as a planetary civilization, we have decided to clap our hands over our ears and
start humming whenever the topic comes up. Insofar as we are even willing to discuss it, it’s
still in the terms popular in the sixties and early seventies. The social movements of the
sixties were, on the whole, left-wing in inspiration, but they were also rebellions against
bureaucracy, or, to put it more accurately, rebellions against the bureaucratic mindset,
against the soul-destroying conformity of the postwar welfare states. In the face of the gray
functionaries of both state-capitalist and state-socialist regimes, sixties rebels stood for
individual expression and spontaneous conviviality, and against (“rules and regulations,
who needs them?”) every form of social control.
With the collapse of the old welfare states, all this has come to seem decidedly quaint. As
the language of antibureaucratic individualism has been adopted, with increasing ferocity,
by the Right, which insists on “market solutions” to every social problem, the mainstream
Left has increasingly reduced itself to fighting a kind of pathetic rearguard action, trying to
salvage remnants of the old welfare state: it has acquiesced with—often even spearheaded
—attempts to make government efforts more “efficient” through the partial privatization of
services and the incorporation of ever-more “market principles,” “market incentives,” and
market-based “accountability processes” into the structure of the bureaucracy itself.
The result is a political catastrophe. There’s really no other way to put it. What is
presented as the “moderate” Left solution to any social problems—and radical left solutions
are, almost everywhere now, ruled out tout court—has invariably come to be some
nightmare fusion of the worst elements of bureaucracy and the worst elements of
capitalism. It’s as if someone had consciously tried to create the least appealing possible
political position. It is a testimony to the genuine lingering power of leftist ideals that
anyone would even consider voting for a party that promoted this sort of thing—because
surely, if they do, it’s not because they actually think these are good policies, but because
these are the only policies anyone who identifies themselves as left-of-center is allowed to
set forth.